EPA and NHTSA, on behalf of
the Department of Transportation, are
each proposing rules to establish a
comprehensive Phase 2 Heavy-Duty
(HD) National Program that will reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
fuel consumption for new on-road
heavy-duty vehicles. This technologyadvancing program would phase in over
the long-term, beginning in the 2018
model year and culminating in
standards for model year 2027,
responding to the President’s directive
on February 18, 2014, to develop new
standards that will take us well into the
next decade. NHTSA’s proposed fuel
consumption standards and EPA’s
proposed carbon dioxide (CO2) emission
standards are tailored to each of four
regulatory categories of heavy-duty
vehicles: Combination tractors; trailers
used in combination with those tractors;
heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans; and
vocational vehicles. The proposal also
includes separate standards for the
engines that power combination tractors
and vocational vehicles. Certain
proposed requirements for control of
GHG emissions are exclusive to EPA
programs. These include EPA’s
proposed hydrofluorocarbon standards
to control leakage from air conditioning
systems in vocational vehicles, and
EPA’s proposed nitrous oxide (N2O) and
methane (CH4) standards for heavy-duty
engines. Additionally, NHTSA is
addressing misalignment in the Phase 1
standards between EPA and NHTSA to
ensure there are no differences in
compliance standards between the
agencies. In an effort to promote
efficiency, the agencies are also
proposing to amend their rules to
modify reporting requirements, such as
the method by which manufacturers
submit pre-model, mid-model, and
supplemental reports. EPA’s proposed
HD Phase 2 GHG emission standards are
authorized under the Clean Air Act and
NHTSA’s proposed HD Phase 2 fuel
consumption standards authorized
under the Energy Independence and
Security Act of 2007.
These standards 
would begin with model year 2018 for 
trailers under EPA standards and 2021 
for all of the other heavy-duty vehicle 
and engine categories. The agencies 
estimate that the combined standards 
would reduce CO2 emissions by 
approximately 1 billion metric tons and 
save 1.8 billion barrels of oil over the 
life of vehicles and engines sold during 
the Phase 2 program, providing over 
$200 billion in net societal benefits. As 
noted, the proposal also includes certain 
EPA-specific provisions relating to 
control of emissions of pollutants other 
than GHGs. EPA is seeking comment on 
non-GHG emission standards relating to 
the use of auxiliary power units 
installed in tractors. In addition, EPA is 
proposing to clarify the classification of 
natural gas engines and other gaseousfueled heavy-duty engines, and is 
proposing closed crankcase standards 
for emissions of all pollutants from 
natural gas heavy-duty engines. EPA is 
also proposing technical amendments to 
EPA rules that apply to emissions of 
non-GHG pollutants from light-duty 
motor vehicles, marine diesel engines, 
and other nonroad engines and 
equipment. Finally, EPA is proposing to 
require that rebuilt engines installed in 
new incomplete vehicles meet the 
emission standards applicable in the 
year of assembly, including all 
applicable standards for criteria 
pollutants. 
DATES: Comments on all aspects of this 
proposal must be received on or before 
September 11, 2015. Under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA), 
comments on the information collection 
provisions are best assured of 
consideration if the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) 
receives a copy of your comments on or 
before August 12, 2015. 
EPA and NHTSA will announce the 
public hearing dates and locations for 
this proposal in a supplemental Federal 
Register document.
ADDRESSES: Submit your comments, 
identified by Docket ID No. EPA–HQ– 
OAR–2014–0827 (for EPA’s docket) and 
NHTSA–2014–0132 (for NHTSA’s 
docket) by one of the following 
methods: 
• Online: www.regulations.gov: 
Follow the on-line instructions for 
submitting comments. 
• Email: a-and-r-docket@epa.gov. 
• Mail: 
EPA: Air and Radiation Docket and 
Information Center, Environmental 
Protection Agency, Mail code: 28221T, 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW., 
Washington, DC 20460. 
NHTSA: Docket Management Facility, 
M–30, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, West Building, Ground 
Floor, Rm. W12–140, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. 
• Hand Delivery: 
EPA: EPA Docket Center, EPA WJC 
West Building, Room 3334, 1301 
Constitution Ave. NW., Washington, DC 
20460. Such deliveries are only 
accepted during the Docket’s normal 
hours of operation, and special 
arrangements should be made for 
deliveries of boxed information. 
NHTSA: West Building, Ground 
Floor, Rm. W12–140, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590, 
between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Eastern Time, 
Monday through Friday, except Federal 
holidays. 
Instructions: EPA and NHTSA have 
established dockets for this action under 
Direct your comments to Docket ID No. 
EPA–HQ–OAR–2014–0827 and/or 
NHTSA–2014–0132, respectively. See 
the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION section 
on ‘‘Public Participation’’ for more 
information about submitting written 
comments. 
Docket: All documents in the docket 
are listed on the www.regulations.gov 
Web site. Although listed in the index, 
some information is not publicly 
available, e.g., confidential business 
information or other information whose 
disclosure is restricted by statute. 
Certain other material, such as 
copyrighted material, is not placed on 
the Internet and will be publicly 
available only in hard copy form. 
Publicly available docket materials are 
available either electronically through 
www.regulations.gov or in hard copy at 
the following locations: 
EPA: Air and Radiation Docket and 
Information Center, EPA Docket Center, 
EPA/DC, EPA WJC West Building, 1301 
Constitution Ave. NW., Room 3334, 
Washington, DC. The Public Reading 
Room is open from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding 
legal holidays. The telephone number 
for the Public Reading Room is (202) 
566–1744, and the telephone number for 
the Air Docket is (202) 566–1742. 
NHTSA: Docket Management Facility, 
M–30, U.S. Department of Transportation, West Building, Ground 
Floor, Rm. W12–140, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. 
The telephone number for the docket 
management facility is (202) 366–9324. 
The docket management facility is open 
between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. Eastern Time, 
Monday through Friday, except Federal 
holidays. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
EPA: For hearing information or to 
register, please contact: JoNell Iffland, 
Office of Transportation and Air 
Quality, Assessment and Standards 
Division (ASD), Environmental 
Protection Agency, 2000 Traverwood 
Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48105; Telephone 
number: (734) 214–4454; Fax number: 
(734) 214–4816; Email address: 
iffland.jonell@epa.gov. For all other 
information related to the rule, please 
contact: Tad Wysor, Office of 
Transportation and Air Quality, 
Assessment and Standards Division 
(ASD), Environmental Protection 
Agency, 2000 Traverwood Drive, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48105; telephone number: 
(734) 214–4332; email address: 
wysor.tad@epa.gov. 
NHTSA: Ryan Hagen or Analiese 
Marchesseault, Office of Chief Counsel, 
National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. 
Telephone: (202) 366–2992; 
ryan.hagen@dot.gov or 
analiese.marchesseault@dot.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
A. Does this action apply to me? 
This proposed action would affect 
companies that manufacture, sell, or 
import into the United States new 
heavy-duty engines and new Class 2b 
through 8 trucks, including combination 
tractors, all types of buses, vocational 
vehicles including municipal, 
commercial, recreational vehicles, and 
commercial trailers as well as 3⁄4-ton 
and 1-ton pickup trucks and vans. The 
heavy-duty category incorporates all 
motor vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 8,500 lbs or greater, and 
the engines that power them, except for 
medium-duty passenger vehicles 
already covered by the greenhouse gas 
standards and corporate average fuel 
economy standards issued for light-duty 
model year 2017–2025 vehicles. 
B. Public Participation 
EPA and NHTSA request comment on 
all aspects of this joint proposed rule. 
This section describes how you can 
participate in this process. 
(1) How do I prepare and submit 
comments? 
In this joint proposal, there are many 
issues common to both EPA’s and 
NHTSA’s proposals. For the 
convenience of all parties, comments 
submitted to the EPA docket will be 
considered comments submitted to the 
NHTSA docket, and vice versa. An 
exception is that comments submitted to 
the NHTSA docket on NHTSA’s Draft 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) 
will not be considered submitted to the 
EPA docket. Therefore, the public only 
needs to submit comments to either one 
of the two agency dockets, although 
they may submit comments to both if 
they so choose. Comments that are 
submitted for consideration by one 
agency should be identified as such, and 
comments that are submitted for 
consideration by both agencies should 
be identified as such. Absent such 
identification, each agency will exercise 
its best judgment to determine whether 
a comment is submitted on its proposal. 
Further instructions for submitting 
comments to either EPA or NHTSA 
docket are described below. 
EPA: Direct your comments to Docket 
ID No. EPA–HQ–OAR–2014–0827. 
EPA’s policy is that all comments 
received will be included in the public 
docket without change and may be 
made available online at 
www.regulations.gov, including any 
personal information provided, unless 
the comment includes information 
claimed to be Confidential Business 
Information (CBI) or other information 
whose disclosure is restricted by statute. 
Do not submit information that you 
consider to be CBI or otherwise 
protected through www.regulations.gov 
or email. The www.regulations.gov Web 
site is an ‘‘anonymous access’’ system, 
which means EPA will not know your 
identity or contact information unless 
you provide it in the body of your 
comment. If you send an email 
comment directly to EPA without going 
through www.regulations.gov your email 
address will be automatically captured 
and included as part of the comment 
that is placed in the public docket and 
made available on the Internet. If you 
submit an electronic comment, EPA 
recommends that you include your name and other contact information in 
the body of your comment and with any 
disk or CD–ROM you submit. If EPA 
cannot read your comment due to 
technical difficulties and cannot contact 
you for clarification, EPA may not be 
able to consider your comment. 
Electronic files should avoid the use of 
special characters, any form of 
encryption, and be free of any defects or 
viruses. For additional information 
about EPA’s public docket visit the EPA 
Docket Center homepage at http://
www.epa.gov/epahome/dockets.htm. 
NHTSA: Your comments must be 
written and in English. To ensure that 
your comments are correctly filed in the 
Docket, please include the Docket 
number NHTSA–2014–0132 in your 
comments. Your comments must not be 
more than 15 pages long.1 NHTSA 
established this limit to encourage you 
to write your primary comments in a 
concise fashion. However, you may 
attach necessary additional documents 
to your comments, and there is no limit 
on the length of the attachments. If you 
are submitting comments electronically 
as a PDF (Adobe) file, we ask that the 
documents submitted be scanned using 
the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 
process, thus allowing the agencies to 
search and copy certain portions of your 
submissions.2 Please note that pursuant 
to the Data Quality Act, in order for the 
substantive data to be relied upon and 
used by the agency, it must meet the 
information quality standards set forth 
in the OMB and Department of 
Transportation (DOT) Data Quality Act 
guidelines. Accordingly, we encourage 
you to consult the guidelines in 
preparing your comments. OMB’s 
guidelines may be accessed at http://
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg/
reproducible.html. DOT’s guidelines 
may be accessed at http://www.dot.gov/ 
dataquality.htm. 
(2) Tips for Preparing Your Comments 
When submitting comments, please 
remember to: 
• Identify the rulemaking by docket 
number and other identifying 
information (subject heading, Federal 
Register date and page number). 
• Explain why you agree or disagree, 
suggest alternatives, and substitute 
language for your requested changes. 
• Describe any assumptions and 
provide any technical information and/ 
or data that you used. 
• If you estimate potential costs or 
burdens, explain how you arrived at 
your estimate in sufficient detail to 
allow for it to be reproduced. 
• Provide specific examples to 
illustrate your concerns, and suggest 
alternatives. 
• Explain your views as clearly as 
possible, avoiding the use of profanity 
or personal threats. 
• Make sure to submit your 
comments by the comment period 
deadline identified in the DATES section 
above. 
(3) How can I be sure that my comments 
were received? 
NHTSA: If you submit your comments 
by mail and wish Docket Management 
to notify you upon its receipt of your 
comments, enclose a self-addressed, 
stamped postcard in the envelope 
containing your comments. Upon 
receiving your comments, Docket 
Management will return the postcard by 
mail. 
(4) How do I submit confidential 
business information? 
Any confidential business 
information (CBI) submitted to one of 
the agencies will also be available to the 
other agency. However, as with all 
public comments, any CBI information 
only needs to be submitted to either one 
of the agencies’ dockets and it will be 
available to the other. Following are 
specific instructions for submitting CBI 
to either agency. If you have any 
questions about CBI or the procedures 
for claiming CBI, please consult the 
persons identified in the FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION CONTACT section. 
EPA: Do not submit CBI to EPA 
through www.regulations.gov or email. 
Clearly mark the part or all of the 
information that you claim to be CBI. 
For CBI information in a disk or CD 
ROM that you mail to EPA, mark the 
outside of the disk or CD ROM as CBI 
and then identify electronically within 
the disk or CD ROM the specific 
information that is claimed as CBI. 
Information not marked as CBI will be 
included in the public docket without 
prior notice. In addition to one complete 
version of the comment that includes 
information claimed as CBI, a copy of 
the comment that does not contain the 
information claimed as CBI must be 
submitted for inclusion in the public 
docket. Information so marked will not 
be disclosed except in accordance with 
procedures set forth in 40 CFR part 2. 
NHTSA: If you wish to submit any 
information under a claim of 
confidentiality, you should submit three 
copies of your complete submission, 
including the information you claim to 
be confidential business information, to 
the Chief Counsel, NHTSA, at the 
address given above under FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION CONTACT. When you send a 
comment containing confidential 
business information, you should 
include a cover letter setting forth the 
information specified in our 
confidential business information 
regulation.3
In addition, you should submit a copy 
from which you have deleted the 
claimed confidential business 
information to the Docket by one of the 
methods set forth above. 
(5) How can I read the comments 
submitted by other people? 
You may read the materials placed in 
the docket for this document (e.g., the 
comments submitted in response to this 
document by other interested persons) 
at any time by going to http://
www.regulations.gov. Follow the online 
instructions for accessing the dockets. 
You may also read the materials at the 
EPA Docket Center or NHTSA Docket 
Management Facility by going to the 
street addresses given above under 
ADDRESSES. 
(6) How do I participate in the public 
hearings? 
EPA and NHTSA will announce the 
public hearing dates and locations for 
this proposal in a supplemental Federal 
Register document. At all hearings, both 
agencies will accept comments on the 
rulemaking, and NHTSA will also 
accept comments on the EIS. 
If you would like to present testimony 
at the public hearings, we ask that you 
notify EPA and NHTSA contact persons 
listed in the FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
CONTACT section at least ten days before 
the hearing. Once EPA and NHTSA 
learn how many people have registered 
to speak at the public hearing, we will 
allocate an appropriate amount of time 
to each participant. For planning 
purposes, each speaker should 
anticipate speaking for approximately 
ten minutes, although we may need to 
adjust the time for each speaker if there 
is a large turnout. We suggest that you 
bring copies of your statement or other 
material for EPA and NHTSA panels. It 
would also be helpful if you send us a 
copy of your statement or other 
materials before the hearing. To 
accommodate as many speakers as 
possible, we prefer that speakers not use 
technological aids (e.g., audio-visuals, 
computer slideshows). However, if you 
plan to do so, you must notify the 
contact persons in the FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION CONTACT section above. 
You also must make arrangements to 
provide your presentation or any other aids to EPA and NHTSA in advance of 
the hearing in order to facilitate set-up. 
In addition, we will reserve a block of 
time for anyone else in the audience 
who wants to give testimony. The 
agencies will assume that comments 
made at the hearings are directed to the 
proposed rule unless commenters 
specifically reference NHTSA’s EIS in 
oral or written testimony. 
The hearing will be held at a site 
accessible to individuals with 
disabilities. Individuals who require 
accommodations such as sign language 
interpreters should contact the persons 
listed under FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
CONTACT section above no later than ten 
days before the date of the hearing. 
EPA and NHTSA will conduct the 
hearing informally, and technical rules 
of evidence will not apply. We will 
arrange for a written transcript of the 
hearing and keep the official record of 
the hearing open for 30 days to allow 
you to submit supplementary 
information. You may make 
arrangements for copies of the transcript 
directly with the court reporter. 
C. Did EPA conduct a peer review 
before issuing this notice? 
This regulatory action is supported by 
influential scientific information. 
Therefore, EPA conducted a peer review 
consistent with OMB’s Final 
Information Quality Bulletin for Peer 
Review. As described in Section II.C.3, 
a peer review of updates to the vehicle 
simulation model (GEM) for the 
proposed Phase 2 standards has been 
completed. This version of GEM is 
based on the model used for the Phase 
1 rule, which was peer-reviewed by a 
panel of four independent subject 
matter experts (from academia and a 
national laboratory). The peer review 
report and the agency’s response to the 
peer review comments are available in 
Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OAR–2014– 
0827. 
D. Executive Summary 
(1) Commitment to Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Reductions and Vehicle Fuel 
Efficiency 
As part of the Climate Action Plan 
announced in June 2013,4 the President 
directed the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) and the Department of 
Transportation’s (DOT) National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) to set the next round of 
standards to reduce greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions and improve fuel 
efficiency for medium- and heavy-duty 
vehicles. More than 70 percent of the oil 
used in the United States and 28 percent 
of GHG emissions come from the 
transportation sector, and since 2009 
EPA and NHTSA have worked with 
industry and states to develop 
ambitious, flexible standards for both 
the fuel economy and GHG emissions of 
light-duty vehicles and the fuel 
efficiency and GHG emissions of heavyduty vehicles.5 6 The standards 
proposed here (referred to as Phase 2) 
would build on the light-duty vehicle 
standards spanning model years 2011 to 
2025 and on the initial phase of 
standards (referred to as Phase 1) for 
new medium and heavy-duty vehicles 
(MDVs and HDVs) and engines in model 
years 2014 to 2018. Throughout every 
stage of development for these 
programs, EPA and NHTSA 
(collectively, the agencies, or ‘‘we’’) 
have worked in close partnership not 
only with one another, but with the 
vehicle manufacturing industry, 
environmental community leaders, and 
the State of California among other 
entities to create a single, effective set of 
national standards. 
Through two previous rulemakings, 
EPA and NHTSA have worked with the 
auto industry to develop new fuel 
economy and GHG emission standards 
for light-duty vehicles. Taken together, 
the light-duty vehicle standards span 
model years 2011 to 2025 and are the 
first significant improvement in fuel 
economy in approximately two decades. 
Under the final program, average new 
car and light truck fuel economy is 
expected to double by 2025.7 This is 
projected to save consumers $1.7 trillion 
at the pump—roughly $8,200 per 
vehicle for a MY2025 vehicle—reducing 
oil consumption by 2.2 million barrels 
a day in 2025 and slashing GHG 
emissions by 6 billion metric tons over 
the lifetime of the vehicles sold during 
this period.8 These fuel economy 
standards are already delivering savings 
for American drivers. Between model 
years 2008 and 2013, the unadjusted 
average test fuel economy of new 
passenger cars and light trucks sold in 
the United States has increased by about 
four miles per gallon. Altogether, lightduty vehicle fuel economy standards 
finalized after 2008 have already saved 
nearly one billion gallons of fuel and 
avoided more than 10 million tons of 
carbon dioxide emissions.9
Similarly, EPA and NHTSA have 
previously developed joint GHG 
emission and fuel efficiency standards 
for MDVs and HDVs. Prior to these 
Phase 1 standards, heavy-duty trucks 
and buses—from delivery vans to the 
largest tractor-trailers—were required to 
meet pollution standards for soot and 
smog-causing air pollutants, but no 
requirements existed for the fuel 
efficiency or carbon pollution from 
these vehicles.10 By 2010, total fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions from 
MDVs and HDVs had been growing, and 
these vehicles accounted for 23 percent 
of total U.S. transportation-related GHG 
emissions.11 In August 2011, the 
agencies finalized the groundbreaking 
Phase 1 standards for new MDVs and 
HDVs in model years 2014 through 
2018. This program, developed with 
support from the trucking and engine 
industries, the State of California, 
Environment Canada, and leaders from 
the environmental community, set 
standards that are expected to save a 
projected 530 million barrels of oil and 
reduce carbon emissions by about 270 
million metric tons, representing one of 
the most significant programs available 
to reduce domestic emissions of 
GHGs.12 The Phase 1 program, as well 
as the many additional actions called for 
in the President’s 2013 Climate Action 
Plan 13 including this Phase 2 
rulemaking, not only result in 
meaningful decreases in GHG 
emissions, but support—indeed are 
critical for—United States leadership to 
encourage other countries to also 
achieve meaningful GHG reductions. 
This proposal builds on our 
commitment to robust collaboration 
with stakeholders and the public. It 
follows an expansive and thorough 
outreach effort in which the agencies 
gathered input, data and views from 
many interested stakeholders, involving 
over 200 meetings with heavy-duty 
vehicle and engine manufacturers, 
technology suppliers, trucking fleets, 
truck drivers, dealerships, 
environmental organizations, and state 
agencies. As with the previous lightduty rules and the heavy-duty Phase 1 
rule, the agencies have consulted frequently with the California Air 
Resources Board staff during the 
development of this Phase 2 proposal, 
given California’s unique ability among 
the states to adopt their own GHG 
standards for on-highway engines and 
vehicles. The agencies look forward to 
feedback and ongoing conversation 
following the release of this proposed 
rule from all stakeholders—including 
through planned public hearings, 
written comments, and other 
opportunities for input. 
(2) Overview of Phase 1 Medium- and 
Heavy-Duty Vehicle Standards 
The President’s direction to EPA and 
NHTSA to develop GHG emission and 
fuel efficiency standards for MDVs and 
HDVs resulted in the agencies’ 
promulgation of the Phase 1 program in 
2011, which covers new trucks and 
heavy vehicles in model years 2014 to 
2018. The Phase 1 program includes 
specific standards for combination 
tractors, heavy-duty pickup trucks and 
vans, and vocational vehicles, and 
includes separate standards for both 
vehicles and engines. The program 
offers extensive flexibility, allowing 
manufacturers to reach standards 
through average fleet calculations, a mix 
of technologies, and the use of various 
credit and banking programs. 
The Phase 1 program was developed 
through close consultation with 
industry and other stakeholders, 
resulting in standards tailored to the 
specifics of each different class of 
vehicles and engines. 
• Heavy-duty combination tractors. 
Combination tractors—semi trucks that 
typically pull trailers—are regulated 
under nine subcategories based on 
weight class, cab type, and roof height. 
These vehicles represent approximately 
two-thirds of all fuel consumption and 
GHG emissions from MDVs and HDVs. 
• Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans. 
Heavy-duty pickup and van standards 
are based on a ‘‘work factor’’ attribute 
that combines a vehicle’s payload, 
towing capabilities, and the presence of 
4-wheel drive. These vehicles represent 
about 15 percent of the fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions from 
MDVs and HDVs. 
• Vocational vehicles. Specialized 
vocational vehicles, which consist of a 
very wide variety of truck and bus types 
(e.g., delivery, refuse, utility, dump, 
cement, transit bus, shuttle bus, school 
bus, emergency vehicles, and 
recreational vehicles) are regulated in 
three subcategories based on engine 
classification. These vehicles represent 
approximately 20 percent of the fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions from 
MDVs and HDVs. The Phase 1 program 
includes EPA GHG standards for 
recreational vehicles, but not NHTSA 
fuel efficiency standards.14
• Heavy-duty engines. In addition to 
vehicle types, the Phase 1 rule has 
separate standards for heavy-duty 
engines, to assure they contribute to the 
overall vehicle reductions in fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions. 
The Phase 1 standards are premised 
on utilization of immediately available 
technologies. The Phase 1 program 
provides flexibilities that facilitate 
compliance. These flexibilities help 
provide sufficient lead time for 
manufacturers to make necessary 
technological improvements and reduce 
the overall cost of the program, without 
compromising overall environmental 
and fuel consumption objectives. The 
primary flexibility provisions are an 
engine averaging, banking, and trading 
(ABT) program and a vehicle ABT 
program. These ABT programs allow for 
emission and/or fuel consumption 
credits to be averaged, banked, or traded 
within each of the regulatory 
subcategories. However, credits are not 
allowed to be transferred across 
subcategories. 
The Phase 1 program is projected to 
save 530 million barrels of oil and avoid 
270 million metric tons of GHG 
emissions.15 At the same time, the 
program is projected to produce $50 
billion in fuel savings, and net societal 
benefits of $49 billion. Today, the Phase 
1 fuel efficiency and GHG reduction 
standards are already reducing GHG 
emissions and U.S. oil consumption, 
and producing fuel savings for 
America’s trucking industry. The market 
appears to be very accepting of the new 
technology, and the agencies have seen 
no evidence of ‘‘pre-buy’’ effects in 
response to the standards. 
(3) Overview of Proposed Phase 2 
Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicle 
Standards 
The Phase 2 GHG and fuel efficiency 
standards for MDVs and HDVs are a 
critical next step in improving fuel 
efficiency and reducing GHG. The 
proposed Phase 2 standards carry 
forward our commitment to meaningful 
collaboration with stakeholders and the 
public, as they build on more than 200 
meetings with manufacturers, suppliers, 
trucking fleets, dealerships, state air 
quality agencies, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), and other 
stakeholders to identify and understand 
the opportunities and challenges 
involved with this next level of fuel 
saving technology. These meetings have 
been invaluable to the agencies, 
enabling the development of a proposal 
that appropriately balances all potential 
impacts and effectively minimizes the 
possibility of unintended consequences. 
Phase 2 would include technologyadvancing standards that would phase 
in over the long-term (through model 
year 2027) to result in an ambitious, yet 
achievable program that would allow 
manufacturers to meet standards 
through a mix of different technologies 
at reasonable cost. The Phase 2 
standards would maintain the 
underlying regulatory structure 
developed in the Phase 1 program, such 
as the general categorization of MDVs 
and HDVs and the separate standards 
for vehicles and engines. However, the 
Phase 2 program would build on and 
advance Phase 1 in a number of 
important ways including: Basing 
standards not only on currently 
available technologies but also on 
utilization of technologies now under 
development or not yet widely deployed 
while providing significant lead time to 
assure adequate time to develop, test, 
and phase in these controls; developing 
standards for trailers; further 
encouraging innovation and providing 
flexibility; including vehicles produced 
by small business manufacturers; 
incorporating enhanced test procedures 
that (among other things) allow 
individual drivetrain and powertrain 
performance to be reflected in the 
vehicle certification process; and using 
an expanded and improved compliance 
simulation model. 
• Strengthening standards to account 
for ongoing technological 
advancements. Relative to the baseline 
as of the end of Phase 1, the proposed 
standards (labeled Alternative 3 or the 
‘‘preferred alternative’’ throughout this 
proposal) would achieve vehicle fuel 
savings of up to 8 percent and 24 
percent, depending on the vehicle 
category. While costs are higher than for 
Phase 1, benefits greatly exceed costs, 
and payback periods are short, meaning 
that consumers will see substantial net 
savings over the vehicle lifetime. 
Payback is estimated at about two years 
for tractors and trailers, about five years 
for vocational vehicles, and about three 
years for heavy-duty pickups and vans. 
The agencies are further proposing to 
phase in these MY 2027 standards with 
interim standards for model years 2021 
and 2024 (and for certain types of 
trailers, EPA is proposing model year 
2018 phase-in standards as well).
In addition to the proposed standards, 
the agencies are considering another 
alternative (Alternative 4), which would 
achieve the same performance as the 
proposed standards 2–3 years earlier, 
leading to overall reductions in fuel use 
and greenhouse gas emissions. The 
agencies believe Alternative 4 has the 
potential to be the maximum feasible 
and appropriate alternative; however, 
based on the evidence currently before 
us, EPA and NHTSA have outstanding 
questions regarding relative risks and 
benefits of Alternative 4 due to the 
timeframe envisioned by that 
alternative. The agencies are proposing 
Alternative 3 based on their analyses 
and projections, and taking into account 
the agencies’ respective statutory 
considerations. The comments that the 
agencies receive on this proposal will be 
instrumental in helping us determine 
standards that are appropriate (for EPA) 
and maximum feasible (for NHTSA), 
given the discretion that both agencies 
have under our respective statutes. 
Therefore, the agencies have presented 
different options and raised specific 
questions throughout the proposed rule, 
focusing in particular on better 
understanding the perspectives on the 
feasible adoption rates of different 
technologies, considering associated 
costs and necessary lead time. 
• Setting standards for trailers for the 
first time. In addition to retaining the 
vehicle and engine categories covered in 
the Phase 1 program, which include 
semi tractors, heavy-duty pickup trucks 
and work vans, vocational vehicles, and 
separate standards for heavy-duty 
engines, the Phase 2 standards propose 
fuel efficiency and GHG emission 
standards for trailers used in 
combination with tractors. Although the 
agencies are not proposing standards for 
all trailer types, the majority of new 
trailers would be covered. 
• Encouraging technological 
innovation while providing flexibility 
and options for manufacturers. For each 
category of HDVs, the standards would 
set performance targets that allow 
manufacturers to achieve reductions 
through a mix of different technologies 
and leave manufacturers free to choose 
any means of compliance. For tractors 
and vocational vehicles, enhanced test 
procedures and an expanded and 
improved compliance simulation model 
enable the proposed vehicle standards 
to encompass more of the complete 
vehicle and to account for engine, 
transmission and driveline 
improvements than the Phase 1 
program. With the addition of the 
powertrain and driveline to the 
compliance model, representative drive 
cycles and vehicle baseline 
configurations become critically 
important to assure the standards 
promote technologies that improve real 
world fuel efficiency and GHG 
emissions. This proposal updates drive 
cycles and vehicle configurations to 
better reflect real world operation. For 
tractor standards, for example, different 
combinations of improvements like 
advanced aerodynamics, engine 
improvements and waste-heat recovery, 
automated transmission, and lower 
rolling resistance tires and automatic 
tire inflation can be used to meet 
standards. Additionally, the agencies’ 
analyses indicate that this proposal 
should have no adverse impact on 
vehicle or engine safety. 
• Providing flexibilities to help 
minimize effect on small businesses. All 
small businesses are exempt from the 
Phase 1 standards. The agencies are 
proposing to regulate small business 
entities under Phase 2 (notably certain 
trailer manufacturers), but have 
conducted extensive proceedings 
pursuant to Section 609 of the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act, and 
otherwise have engaged in extensive 
consultation with stakeholders, and 
developed a proposed approach to 
provide targeted flexibilities geared 
toward helping small businesses comply 
with the Phase 2 standards. Specifically, 
the agencies are proposing to delay all 
new requirements by one year and 
simplify certification requirements for 
small businesses, and are further 
proposing additional specific 
flexibilities adapted to particular types 
of trailers.
